Hello everybody and welcome to this lecture where we are going to put together our first piece of the
puzzle our chess board.
So by the end of this lecture we will be in a position where we've got a lovely chess board like this.
Let's find out more.
Hello everybody and welcome.
So in this lecture first of all we're going to talk about the difference between a mesh object and mesh
data itself.
We've explored a little about it.
Let's get a bit more formal.
So at the moment we have an object in front of us our sacred
default cube if we have a look in the outliner we can see it's named cube.
If we have a look at the object's properties we can see that it's called cube.
And if we go down to this upside down triangle we can see it's called cube and in the outliner itself
if we go ahead and click the little dropdown next to cube we see that it's got an upside down triangle
with cube next to it and that has materials assigned to it a default material.
Okay.
So we can see there that the material is linked to mesh data which is linked to a mesh object.
What does that mean.
What whilst we're in the default cube if I was to press tab to go and edit that default cube we're now
editing the mesh data.
If I was to go and add in a ooh key another cube and move it over here or if i was to go in and
add an ico  sphere and move it over here.
This is additional mesh data within our mesh object.
If we tab back out into object mode we can perform objects level operations on it which is really useful.
That's where our modifiers will come in.
They affect the objects not the data within have scales and transforms they affect the objects.
And once again not the data within well those are things to watch out for there's a distinct separation
between the two.
And there will be times where for instance we can go into a mesh object by pressing tab and then highlighting
everything and deleting it.
So now we have a mesh object that has mesh data in it.
There isn't actually any data within that mesh data and it also has a material assigned to it as well.
So what can we do when we're in this position.
Well we could add a new bit of mesh data and we could go shift in A and add in a grid and a grid is
going gonna be quite useful for what we're about to do with a chessboard.
So that zoom in slightly into here.
Now we can see before we do anything else by the way and click away.
You may lose your operator panel if you've done that.
If you have just delete it and re add a grid we'll see that this is a 10 by 10 grid.
But when we count it would be nine by nine squares.
So we're talking about the vertices along the edge.
So to make a chessboard we could highlight this and change it to nine by nine and that will give us
eight by eight
grid perfect.
Now comes the arduous process of selecting individual faces and setting the material appropriately to
something else.
But there are a couple of ways of doing this.
I want to firstly show you one way which would be checker
deselect this is incredibly useful when it comes to selecting alternating faces.
So how do we use that.
So we can get to it two ways.
You can either press F3 and search for it or it's under the select menu itself under checker
deselect.
Now you may notice it selected ooh checker deselect and selected alternating vertices because we
had it on vertex select we switch it to face mode select all the faces and do exactly the same again.
It will select the individual faces.
Now that might not be an option based upon your geometry that you're working on.
So we may have to approach it in a different way.
So how would we do that.
Well for instance we need to look at what's the repeating pattern is now depending on the underlying
geometry this selection method might not actually be that useful.
Checker deselect might not get you to this end point.
So how can we minimize the amount of changes we would need to do if we wanted to change let say the
material assignment on our model.
Well how many repeating patterns do we have here.
And how can we narrow it down.
Well the the smallest repeating pattern that we can have is this small group of four squares.
So let's go back and think about that logically.
I'm going to highlight everything and delete it once more and add in a another grid.
And this time think about the size of my grid as well as I'm going to have the accurate  as per
my specifications.
I would want to have this eight by six centimeters.
It's eight lots of six centimetre grids.
So that's one way of getting the board the right scale.
And then you could use the checker deselect.
But really here we want a three by three.
So it's just our standard for squares.
And then the size of it will be just two squares across.
In this case that's going to be twelve centimeters.
And there we go.
Those are all squares.
Ready to work with.
And at this point we can come in and select some individual faces and then go ahead to the materials
properties and ooh.
So there's a base material already on there.
I'm going to call that white squares for the moment and we're going to add a new material slot.
We're going to call the new material black squares.
We don't need to inherit any of the previous properties we haven't set any of these up before.
This is literally going to be the color of the squares and the keen eyed amongst you will have spotted
the spelling mistake that's totally deliberate.
Right.
We've got black and white squares that scroll down here and just set the base color nearly to black.
The reason why I say nearly to black is because black is a color that doesn't really exist unless you're
making a black hole.
Everything generally reflects light.
OK.
Well let's assign it and the first thing you'll be doing is why I can't see what's going on what's going
on.
Well remember we need to change the rendering view type some of the set it's to lookdev mode.
We can see our individually colored squares and I can go to my white squares and just test that's working
by setting them to something a bit more colorful.
And of course I can set it's a white and if you do want to set something to white really really easily
one of the ways of doing it is to make sure that all of the RGB values are set to one or under the
hue saturation and value.
We don't have any hue.
The hue doesn't matter when it comes to white but the saturation has to be zero.
And the value of one.
So we have a pure white square there.
So you've got this gray and white square this grid that we've created.
Now comes the matter of replicating and reproducing it lots and I'm sure you will agree with me if this
happened to be a repeating pattern that wasn't the grid that we've got it's far easier to change four
squares than it is 64 squares.
That would be a nightmare to have to do every time you change your mind.
So what do we do in this case how can we go ahead and repeat this.
And to answer that it's time for your challenge. Okay so your challenge is to create a white and the
black material.
If you haven't done already apply the materials to the board again.
If you haven't done that already and I'd like you to create the board using 2 array modifiers to create
the rest of it.
Now I'd like you in this case to apply the array modifiers and in the challenge solution will discuss
some of the pros and cons about applying modifiers.
In this case I'd like to think carefully about where you might want to apply a modifier vs. when it
would be best if it weren't applied.
And this will help you during the future.
Just thinking about it is the first step and we'll go through in this case why we're applying them now.
Don't worry about the board not being centered around the sce,e we're going to sort that's out in the
next lecture and I'd like you to also name your mesh object.
That is something I see no end.
People forget to name things and you end up with hundreds and hundreds of objects named cube or plane
or sphere and it just doesn't make sense when you get back to the project later on it becomes a real
mess to try and work with it and also consider naming the mesh data as well.
Pause video now and give that a go.
Hello everybody and welcome back.
Let's go ahead now hop on over into blender and finish off our chessboard OK everybody welcome back.
So let's go ahead.
The first thing I'm going to do here is name my mesh object.
I've gone to the object tab in the properties window.
I could also go ahead over here and rename it in the outliner.
Sometimes I find the outliner can be a bit for finickity when trying to type things in and double clicking
so I can call this chessboard.
I did think about calling it board but chess board is much more appropriate.
And if we open up that we see our cube so I can go ahead there and call that chess board as well.
And again if you need to you can change that down in the mesh data properties down here of the object
data properties and this is the objects.
If we hover over it and this is the object data of course that changes depending on what type of object
it is.
Let's go to our modifiers tab and add in an array modifier.
So we need to repeat this four times in the x direction.
Great.
Now I can apply that straight away or I can double it up.
So I'm going to double its up to begin with.
And then just discuss why we want to make sure that we apply the modifiers in this case rather than
keeping them there.
So it's going to be zero on the X axis for our relative offset and one on the Y axis.
There we go.
I'm going to save my work right.
So do we apply or do we not apply.
What are the pros and cons here.
What did
you guys decide when you were going through about applying a modifier.
Now I know it's early days but it's great to have a little bit of a mental exercise to think about why,
when and where you may want to apply vs. leaving your modifiers turned on.
So in this particular case I know the project inside out.
So I know we need to apply it.
But what if you didn't.
Okay so at this point we can say that we've made the grid now how many times are we going to go back
and edit that mesh.
I'm probably not going to edit it that much if at all.
We've got our basic grid, it's the right size.
I don't think we need to do anything else in this particular case.
Mm hmm.
Now what about the origin of our object at the moment the object that exists it's just thes four squares,
these four squares in the top not the rest of it.
So I'm going to have to take that into account and move the origin outside of the objects.
This may have an impact with physics or something else within blender at this particular point.
It's a question of how much pain it's going to be if we applied this.
We don't need to worry about materials in this particular case because if we go to our materials properties
those materials will be there and assigned to these squares no matter what.
If we need to reassign all of these 64 squares to different materials that's a different question.
But for the moment we can stick with white squares and black squares.
So in this particular case we can go back to our modifiers themselves and apply them.
You can't apply them in edit mode you may have already discovered that.
So let's apply them.
Okay.
So there we go.
Everything's done and dusted.
I'm really looking forward to seeing how your boards are coming along so do share them over in the discussions
and any issues or tips and tricks that you've come across as you've been modelling and I'll see you
all in the next lecture.